# NP_DataHub
Even though there are databases that cater to donors and monitor baseline financial activity for nonprofits, there is no one public resource that allows the end-user to visualize fiscal performance of these organizations and examine longitudinal data for each nonprofit and an entire non-profit sector, of which there are 26 as defined by the IRS. Based on public IRS data, culled over eight years, the overall objective of this project is to build an open-source platform, allowing the end-user to visualize nonprofit fiscal performance to help grantmakers, donors, and public policymakers make more accurate and efficient decisions. Essentially, this platform will be similar to the Bloomberg terminal but open source for nonprofits. <br />
<br />
In short, the tentatively named NP DataHub is a cloud-based data intelligence platform for philanthropies and nonprofits that offers algorithmic-based insights for more strategic community investment. <br />
<br />
Often, nonprofits have little direction in collaborating with other organizations with similar missions based on a data-specific composition and geography. Grant-making foundations have a similar problem. Both also have few pathways to combine resources through donor engagement to holistically fund or approach a societal problem, of which public data addressing these problems is more readily and publicly accessible. Instead, these processes are piece-mealed. The objective is to create a platform that links pathways and explains the findings while building on the basic historical data that can be found on other non-profit document aggregation websites like Guidestar (Candid) and Charity Navigator. <br />
<br />
The intention is to create the platform and continuously build machine-learning capabilities based on the IRS database for 330,000 nonprofits and philanthropies across the United States. This includes data since 2012 and more than 200 essential data fields. During the summer of 2020, the project client outlined machine-learning algorithmic tools that will offer more data-specific insight to the end-user. Data is often one year behind the fiscal year of any reporting nonprofit as the IRS offers a generous window for filing. This means that it’s essential to match public data within these years for accuracy.<br />
<br />
Potential markets for the application include existing community/family foundations or nonprofits. In early customer- and user-discovery discussions, the platform can be strategically used by philanthropic organizations looking to connect donors or government entities which oversee budgetary decisions with desired areas of interest, and in the process, can allocate or pool resources more strategically and efficiently. Further, it allows the gathering and analysis of public data to solve problems tied to individual nonprofit missions or that of an entire nonprofit sector.<br />
<br />
As for the total potential market, [according to the Office of the New York State Comptroller](https://www.osc.state.ny.us/files/reports/special-topics/pdf/economic-nonprofits-2019.pdf), in 2017, there were more than 300,000 nonprofit organizations nationwide, an increase of nearly 29 percent from 2007. Further, New York had the second largest number of nonprofit establishments in the nation — more than 33,700. These accounted for 5.4 percent of all private sector establishments in the state and 11.3 percent of all nonprofits nationwide. This increase of more than 5,400 organizations from more than a decade ago represents growth of 19.3 percent. Given the current fiscal climate, sector contraction is possible, which may still open opportunities for collaboration. It should be noted that the lag in fuller reporting has been caused by the pandemic so a decision has been made to let the data lead in understanding the size of each NTEE sector. This means the platform can only produce results based on the readily available data.<br />
<br />
